The Global Positioning System (GPS), originally Navstar GPS,[1][2] is a space-based
 radionavigation system owned by the United States government and operated by the
 United States Air Force. It is a global navigation satellite system that provides
 geolocation and time information to a GPS receiver anywhere on or near the Earth
 where there is an unobstructed line of sight to four or more GPS satellites.[3]

The GPS system does not require the user to transmit any data, and it operates
 independently of any telephonic or internet reception, though these technologies
 can enhance the usefulness of the GPS positioning information. The GPS system
 provides critical positioning capabilities to military, civil, and commercial
 users around the world. The United States government created the system,
 maintains it, and makes it freely accessible to anyone with a GPS receiver.
 However, the US government can selectively deny access to the system, as
 happened to the Indian military in 1999 during the Kargil War.[4]

The GPS project was launched in the United States in 1973 to overcome the
 limitations of previous navigation systems,[5] integrating ideas from several
 predecessors, including a number of classified engineering design studies from
 the 1960s. The U.S. Department of Defense developed the system, which originally
 used 24 satellites. It became fully operational in 1995. Roger L. Easton of the
 Naval Research Laboratory, Ivan A. Getting of The Aerospace Corporation, and
 Bradford Parkinson of the Applied Physics Laboratory are credited with inventing
 it.[6]

Advances in technology and new demands on the existing system have now led to
 efforts to modernize the GPS and implement the next generation of GPS Block
 IIIA satellites and Next Generation Operational Control System (OCX).[7]
 Announcements from Vice President Al Gore and the White House in 1998 initiated
 these changes. In 2000, the U.S. Congress authorized the modernization effort,
 GPS III.

In addition to GPS, other systems are in use or under development, mainly because
 of a potential denial of access by the US government. The Russian Global Navigation
 Satellite System (GLONASS) was developed contemporaneously with GPS, but suffered
 from incomplete coverage of the globe until the mid-2000s.[8] GLONASS can be added
 to GPS devices, making more satellites available and enabling positions to be fixed
 more quickly and accurately, to within two meters.[9] There are also the European
 Union Galileo positioning system, China's BeiDou Navigation Satellite System and
 India's NAVIC.
